FESVR + Spike Description (#248)
ucb-bar/chipyard: docs/Advanced-Usage/Chip-Communication.rst

.. _chip-communication:

> Communicating with the Chip/DUT

Reviewer: I think we mostly need to differentiate here between Protocols, Software API, and physical transport mediums/implementations

===============================

> What good is a chip/DUT if it can't communicate with the outside world? There are two types of designs that can be

Reviewer 2: this is stylistic, but the question doesn't really seem to flow into the rest of the text

made: tethered or standalone designs. A tethered design is where a host must interact with the DUT (a target) to bringup the design.
A standalone design is a design that can bringup itself (has its own bootrom, loads programs itself, etc). An example of a tethered design

> is a Chipyard simulation where the host computer loads the test program into the designs memory. An example of a standalone design is

Reviewer: designs -> design's

Author: What are you pointing at?

Reviewer: outdated

a design where a program can be loaded from an SDCard by default.

> Chipyard designs communicate to the outside world in one of two ways that mainly correspond to a tethered design:

Reviewer 2: communicate with

> Chipyard designs communicate to the outside world in one of two ways that mainly correspond to a tethered design:

Reviewer 3: This sentence can be made clearer.

"There are two ways the outside world (or host) can communicate with a tethered Chipyard design"

> * using the Tethered Serial Interface (TSI) or the Debug Module Interface (DMI) with the Front-End Server (FESVR) to communicate with the design

Reviewer: using -> Using ? (I'm not sure about this one)
(for the next bullet as well)

* using the JTAG interface with OpenOCD and GDB to communicate with the design

Using the Tethered Serial Interface (TSI) or the Debug Module Interface (DMI)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you are using TSI or the DMI to communicate with the target (DUT/chip), you are using
the Front-End Server (FESVR) to facilitate communication between the host machine and the target.

Primer on the Front-End Server (FESVR)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

FESVR is a C++ library that manages communication
between a host machine and a RISC-V target. For debugging, it provides a simple API to reset,

> send messages, and load/run programs on a DUT but it also provides peripheral device emulation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
send messages, and load/run programs on a DUT. It also emulates peripheral devices.
```

> It can be added used simulators (VCS, Verilator, FireSim) as well as in a bringup sequence

Reviewer 2: s/added used/incorporated with/

> It can be added used simulators (VCS, Verilator, FireSim) as well as in a bringup sequence

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It can be added compiled into simulators (VCS, Verilator, FireSim), or used in a bringup sequence
```

for a taped out chip.

Specifically, FESVR uses the Host Target Interface (HTIF), a communication bus for the hardware,

> to speak with the target. HTIF is a non-standard Berkeley extension that uses a FIFO non-blocking

Reviewer: what does a "non-standard Berkeley extension" mean? extension to what?

interface to communicate with the target.

Using the Tethered Serial Interface (TSI)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> By default, Chipyard uses the Tethered Serial Interface (TSI) to communicate with the target.

Reviewer: Should probably be consistent with the naming. Design (used further up in the document) vs. target. Keep in mind that firesim/midas use the term "target" to indicate the entire simulation (including models)

> TSI is the implementation of the HTIF that is used to send commands to the

Reviewer 2: is an implementation of HTIF

RISC-V target. These TSI commands are simple R/W commands
that are able to probe the DUT's memory space. In simulation, these TSI commands connect
to a ``SimSerial`` (located in the ``generators/testchipip`` project) simulation C++
class that is added to simulation. This ``SimSerial`` device sends the TSI command to
the DUT which contains a ``SerialAdapter`` (located in the ``generators/testchipip``

> project) that converts the TSI commands to TileLink requests. In simulation, FESVR

Reviewer: SimSerial is a simulation C++ class or a device?

resets the DUT, and writes into memory the test program. This is currently the fastest

> mechanism to simulate the DUT.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean "This is currently the fastest mechanism to communicate with the DUT in simulation." ?

> In the case of a chip tapeout bringup, TSI commands can be sent over a modified communication

Reviewer 2: s/modified/custom/ ?

medium to communicate with the chip. For example, some Berkeley tapeouts have a FPGA
with a RISC-V soft-core that runs FESVR. The FESVR on the soft-core sends TSI commands
to a TSI to TileLink converter living on the FPGA (i.e. ``SerialAdapter``). Then this converter
sends the converted TileLink commands over a serial link to the chip.

Using the Debug Module Interface (DMI)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another option to bringup the target is to use the Debug Module Interface (DMI) provided by a Debug Transfer Module (DTM) existing within the target.
Similar to TSI, DMI is an implementation of HTIF.
The DTM is given in the `RISC-V Debug Specification <https://riscv.org/specifications/debug-specification/>`__ and is responsible for managing communication between

> the target and whatever lives on the other side of the DMI (in this case FESVR). This is added by default

Reviewer: If you need to add the mix-ins, then I'm not sure the term "added by default" is correct?

to the Rocket Chip ``Subsystem`` by having the ``HasPeripheryDebug`` and ``HasPeripheryDebugModuleImp`` mixins.
Chipyard disables the DTM by default so that it can use the TSI interface.
This is because the DTM executes a small loop of code to write the test binary byte-wise into memory
while the default ``SimSerial``/``SerialAdapter``/TSI interface directly writes to memory.

Starting the TSI or DMI Simulation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since Chipyard uses TSI by default, you can run a TSI based simulation by running any of the default

> configurations. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All default Chipyard configurations use TSI to communicate between the simulation and the simulated SoC.
Hence, when running a software RTL simulation as is indicated in the :ref:`Software RTL Simulation` section, you are in-fact using TSI. As a reminder, to run a software RTL simulation run:
```

Reviewer: I still don't know how to do a suggestion for multiple lines. This should apply to the previous line as well

.. code-block:: bash

   cd sims/verilator
   # or
   cd sims/vcs

   make CONFIG=LargeBoomConfig run-asm-tests

> If you would like to build and simulate a DMI system with a Chipyard configuration, the you must create a

Reviewer: A Chipyard configuration with a DMI interface
(order - what is the main thing, and what is the interface/communication mechanism)

top-level system with the DTM as well as a config to use that top-level system.

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/example/src/main/scala/RocketConfigs.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: DmiRocket
    :end-before: DOC include end: DmiRocket

In this example, the ``WithDTMTop`` mixin specifies that the top-level SoC will instantiate a DTM.
The rest of the mixins specify the rest of the system (cores, accelerators, etc).

.. code-block:: bash

    cd sims/verilator
    # or
    cd sims/vcs

    make CONFIG=dmiRocketConfig TOP=TopWithDTM MODEL=TestHarnessWithDTM run-asm-tests

Using the JTAG Interface
------------------------

The main way to use JTAG with a Rocket Chip based system is to instantiate the Debug Transfer Module (DTM)
and configure it to use a JTAG interface (by default the DTM is setup to use the DMI interface mentioned above).

> However, if you want to use JTAG, you must do the following steps to setup a DTM+JTAG enabled system.

Reviewer: Why "However"?

TSI protocol is an implementation of HTIF that is used to send commands to the
RISC-V DUT. These TSI commands are simple R/W commands
that are able to probe the DUT's memory space. During simulation, the host sends TSI commands to a
simulation stub called ``SimSerial`` (C++ class) that resides in a ``SimSerial`` verilog module
(both are located in the ``generators/testchipip`` project). This ``SimSerial`` verilog module then
sends the TSI command recieved by the simulation stub into the DUT which then converts the TSI
command into a TileLink request. This conversion is done by the ``SerialAdapter`` module
(located in the ``generators/testchipip`` project). In simulation, FESVR
resets the DUT, writes into memory the test program, and indicates to the DUT to start the program
through an interrupt (see :ref:`Chipyard Boot Process`). Using TSI is currently the fastest
mechanism to communicate with the DUT in simulation.

In the case of a chip tapeout bringup, TSI commands can be sent over a custom communication
medium to communicate with the chip. For example, some Berkeley tapeouts have a FPGA
with a RISC-V soft-core that runs FESVR. The FESVR on the soft-core sends TSI commands

> to a TSI to TileLink converter living on the FPGA (i.e. ``SerialAdapter``). Then this converter

Reviewer: TSI-to-Tilelink

sends the DMI command recieved by the simulation stub into the DUT which then converts the DMI
command into a TileLink request. This conversion is done by the DTM named ``DebugModule`` in the ``generators/rocket-chip`` project.
When the DTM receives the program to load, it starts to write the binary byte-wise into memory.
This is considerably slower than the TSI protocol communication pipeline (i.e. ``SimSerial``/``SerialAdapter``/TileLink)
which directly writes the program binary to memory.
Thus, Chipyard removes the DTM by default in favor of the TSI protocol for DUT communication.

Starting the TSI or DMI Simulation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All default Chipyard configurations use TSI to communicate between the simulation and the simulated SoC/DUT. Hence, when running a
software RTL simulation, as is indicated in the :ref:`Software RTL Simulation` section, you are in-fact using TSI to communicate with the DUT. As a
reminder, to run a software RTL simulation, run:

.. code-block:: bash

   cd sims/verilator
   # or
   cd sims/vcs

   make CONFIG=LargeBoomConfig run-asm-tests

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

FireSim FPGA-accelerated simulations use TSI by default as well.
```

Creating a DTM+JTAG Config
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, a DTM config must be created for the system that you want to create.
This step is similar to the DMI simulation section within the :ref:`Starting the TSI or DMI Simulation` section.
First, you must make a top-level system (``TopWithDTM``) and test-harness (``TestHarnessWithDTM``) that instantiates
and connects the DTM correctly. The configuration is very similar to a DMI-based configuration. The main difference
is the addition of the ``WithJtagDTM`` mixin that configures the instantiated DTM to use the JTAG protocol as the
bringup method.

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/example/src/main/scala/RocketConfigs.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: JtagRocket
    :end-before: DOC include end: JtagRocket

Building a DTM+JTAG Simulator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After creating the config, call the ``make`` command like the following to build a simulator for your RTL:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd sims/verilator
    # or
    cd sims/vcs

    make CONFIG=jtagRocketConfig TOP=TopWithDTM MODEL=TestHarnessWithDTM

> In this example, this will use the config that you previously specified, as well as set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the simulation will use the config that you previously specified, as well as set
```

.. _chip-communication:

> Communicating with the Chip/DUT

Reviewer 4: I would preface this with a section describing tethered vs standalone designs.

===============================

What good is a chip if it can't communicate with the outside world? Chipyard designs communicate to the outside world in
one of two ways:

> * using the Front-End Server (FESVR)

Reviewer 4: This is wrong. Both DTM and TSI use FESVR, and the JTAG debug interface uses GDB.

* using Rocket Chip's JTAG/DTM interface.

> Debugging with the Front-End Server (FESVR)

Reviewer 4: Can you crib some docs from the last 250 course to teach this stuff?

Author: Can you give me a link?

Author: https://riscv.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/riscv-software-stack-bootcamp-jan2015.pdf

Reviewer 2: damn that's... classic
